the first time they've come to the royal
commission they actually gave evidence
earlier this year but today when looking
into the
training and education for medical
professionals
they told the royal commission that they
have often gone to emergency departments
places where joshi feels quite
overwhelmed and have
often had to sit for up to eight hours
and
tony mitchell his mum was saying that um
joshie who lives
with down syndrome and is also autistic
that
many occasions doctors and nurses
haven't been able to see
past his visible disability that being
the down syndrome and often
overlook things like um that might also
be going on for joshi like chronic pain
and other bits and pieces
and she does run training for example
with the toowoomba hospital once a year
and she really wants that training
to be extended across the country and
more regularly
she's also said that often she tries to
explain joshie's needs but she's often
dismissed as
just a mum that doesn't doesn't know
what she's talking about and let's have
a little listen to what tony had to say
there's so many gaps in the services
and in the training that it's
really important that disabilities be
covered in more detail
especially when you know one in five
people in our population
has a disability it should be something
that's much more
covered in their training across the
board
not just doctors but the nurses and
allied health and dentists
as well you know joshie went in for a
dental appointment at the hospital
and their way of holding him down was to
put their arm across his throat
and put him to the bed this isn't
appropriate and getting restraining
people with security guards coming in to
hold them down on the bed so tests can
be done
this isn't appropriate and it's not
acceptable
and better training and better
accommodations with people with
disabilities so they can be treated
without being hurt
and terrified is is
it has to get better it can't continue
the way it is
so this is the final day for the
inquiries for the year they will be back
next year the first one
is going to be quite a long one it's um
people with disabilities and their
interaction
with the justice system it'll be held in
february over eight days and then
there's going to be
a string of um other inquiries after
that things like education
and first nations people and also
the out of home care system
the future of air travel could be very
different in a post coronavirus world
airports are becoming more high tech in
an effort to reduce the number of
surfaces that staff and travelers come
into contact with
for more i'm joined by leonardo di mares
who's a postdoctoral research fellow in
tourism resilience and urban planning at
the university of melbourne
thank you so much for your time tonight
there are so many people
traveling through airports again at
least domestically ahead of christmas
how has that travel changed
well they'll probably see a lot more
increased cleaning
the application of antimicrobial coating
on x-ray trays and security checkpoints
there could be the use of masks being
mandatory for certain airports and
and flights so it's better to check
beforehand
but they're likely to encounter a lot of
hand sanitizer stations throughout the
the airport and the overall promotion of
physical distancing through
signage announcements uh sitting
arrangements and and killing management
they could also see protective screens
separating passengers and airport stuffs
when they
when they do need to interact but
overall a wider adoption of paperless
procedures including online
self-checking
and backdrops and electronic arrival and
departure cards when applicable
and of course contactless payments
throughout
retail shops and and and cafes they may
also encounter
temperature checks um they may need to
use contact tracing
apps when interacting or being in
specific places
but it's it's important to bear in mind
that international and domestic
travelers are handled separately so
there's no need to
to worry about about that and with the
pausing of in-flight muse there's also
the suggestion that travelers
have meals before um boarding however
it's it's best to bear in mind that not
all restaurants and cafes may be open as
passenger numbers
are still lower than preco with normal
standards and so what else do you think
needs to change um
we could see the use of facial
recognition to enhance the adoption of
of paperless
procedures in the very near future that
could also help with
contact uh tracing and and tracking of
passengers as they move through the
different stages to
um into boarding uh the flights we have
in helsinki the um employment of uh
sniffer
dogs um targeting um covet
active uh cases uh so we could see that
happening in australia very
very soon as well but overall there
could be also the use of artificial
intelligence coupled with
contact tracing records to better manage
passenger movement within the airport
and and the whole idea is that through
this better management you can avoid
crowding at specific parts of
of the airport um we could also see
pre-departure testing and testing upon
arrival for passengers
on flights coming from a low-risk
countries instead of mandatory
quarantine but that's still unclear
whether that's the case for
for australia and of course there's a
lot of talk about
vaccine requirements for onboarding
flights once these
are available but ultimately these
measures target not only public safety
but also the rebuilding of consumer
confidence which is uh
important as a means to
enhance recovery of of the trouble and
tourism sector
you talk about biometrics and facial
recognition how would that work if
people are wearing masks
oh they will probably need to uh take
the masks off whenever
they are at checkpoints or when when
these
facial recognition needs to to happen
and that would be uh in points where you
usually need to
show your boarding card for instance so
instead of showing your boarding card
your face would be your your boarding
card instead sure and so if we do away
with things like boarding passes but
people
are wearing masks so you know are there
some security concerns that could be
associated with that
uh not really because uh you you would
still have gates
right in these uh in these checkpoints
so people could couldn't still
go through these checkpoints without
being properly
recognized and i would imagine that the
facial recognition wouldn't be the only
way to control
the crossing of these of these gates uh
the same way
um it's the case with electronic um
uh passports and and e-gates uh at the
moment
so there's uh there'll always be backups
to that
and should we be concerned about privacy
if all this
data is being collected about us at
airports
well i would imagine that uh these would
have to follow very uh strict uh data
privacy
uh rules and and regulations to ensure
that um
our privacy is protected throughout the
those processes for sure
and you've also got some thoughts about
how to limit contact with surfaces in
airports yes
uh so you can as long as you
uh think about the whole uh trajectory
that that travelers are
going through these these airports you
can uh design
the airport in a way to avoid these
these interactions and these these
contact surfaces
so that could be through very simple
things such as
the way we design bathrooms and the way
we require
you to go through doors to access uh
different parts of these these bathrooms
uh through
um baggage handling and uh
an anti-microbial coating for surfaces
exactly yeah so that's that's one thing
that's uh
already being employed in some of the uh
the airports especially for
um the uh x-ray uh trays which are
usually handled by uh
um a fairly good number of people
okay leonardo di mariz thanks so much
for your time
thank you have a good evening
australia's consumer watchdog is taking
on a social
media company facebook accusing the
company of misleading and deceptive
conduct relating to a mobile phone
app the australian competition and
consumer commission alleges facebook
claimed its vpn service would keep
users data private but instead used the
data commercially
it names facebook and two of its
subsidiaries in a federal court case
launched today
the acccc chairman rod sims has told
patricia carvelis the most concerning
part is the fact facebook
broke its promise to protect users data
here you have a an app being promoted on
the basis that it's going to
protect privacy it's going to keep your
keep your dealings safe those were the
explicit
statements and yet the data was being
mined to track your activity on the
internet and on various apps for example
which apps you visited how long you're
on them so it's that contrast between
what was said
and what was done that most concerns us
what was facebook doing with the data
that it actually
collected it was trying to work out
what apps people visited so that it
could work out for example
which businesses it might try and
acquire
and which ones it could learn from uh
copy what they're doing so that those
people would
stay with facebook or come to facebook
rather than go to those other apps it
was very much to try and
uh get more business onto facebook
and and try and uh as as were
undermine uh competitive apps did
facebook disclose what the app was doing
in its terms and conditions there was
a reference to the terms and conditions
at the bottom of a particular page you
then had to
click through uh usually you could only
do that once you'd actually
acquired the uh a navoprotect
app so it was all fairly obscure and i
guess patricia we spend our lives
pointing out to people you can't
have headline representations that say
one thing
and have something buried uh that people
have to struggle to find and go through
a lot of steps to look through
that might say something different it's
that headline representation
that's really got to be not misleading
our tech research shows the food of
seals whales and
polar bears is threatened by melting sea
ice
polar cod rely on the tiny algae that
usually grow
beneath the sea ice but warming
temperatures mean both the ice and
plants are disappearing
delphine lanazul from the university of
tasmania says as the population declines
its predators will too
in the case of polar code they will end
up feeding on zooplankton that is not as
nutritious as it used to be so that
would definitely have an effect on them
and then
that has a domino effect on the rest of
the ecosystem
it's really a tale of winners and losers
some species will be doing better
the ones that are more used to marine
conditions or oceanic conditions
like for example the berlin whales would
be doing a lot better in the future
but other species that are entirely
depending uh like the polar cod
are then going to be struggling with the
disappearance of sea ice
the much-anticipated cricket test
between australia and
india begins tomorrow night at adelaide
oval india says its bowlers will be
capable of taking 20 wickets in the day
night contest
but australian captain tim payne says
being able to practice under lights at
the adelaide oval has given the home
side a big advantage
for more i'm joined by abc sports brett
sprigg brett you're going to be calling
this match
in adelaide tomorrow it looks like joe
burns has kept his opening spot
corona yeah quite right which is a
surprise given his
form in the tour match last week at the
scg norton won his scores
opening with marcus harris so the fact
that joe burns is in
marcus harris won't be playing and it
looks like
matthew wade will be joe burns opening
partner
at the top of the aussie order which is
unusual
uh but the fact that joe burns is in he
has previous sets experience he debuted
against india
back in the 2014-15 summer it is a
surprise to say the least but uh that is
uh the word that we've got today
and that is how the aussie side will
take shape going into tomorrow's
first test would it have been a
different story if young gun will
pukowski had been fit
probably yeah you think about all the
momentum that will cost you had going
for him the fact that he had
made an unbelievable volume of sheffield
shield runs
and then his latest concussion scare off
the back of the dremoine tour game
a couple of weeks ago if he had been fit
i think he would have been in line for
that test spot but
uh as i say i think burns harris opening
combo would have been
agreeable but the fact that harris
misses out burns comes in
uh it is a surprise but yeah i think
will burkovsky will factor in at some
point we can see there the way he was a
concussed in that drama in tour game
uh yeah it's unfortunate he won't be a
part of the australian team and will
have to wait a little bit longer
for his debut and will cameron green
make his test debut
it certainly seems that way yeah justin
langer spoke yesterday about the fact
that
he had copped that knock to the head
while bowling in the scg
scg tour game last weekend uh this is a
young man from wa
who is equal parts proficient in batting
and bowling
the question has been karina how to get
it into the australian side
uh so the fact that he may be cleared to
play it seems like today that's pretty
promising he will be cleared to play
he will debut in the aussie test team
tomorrow
and what's justin langer had to say
about the team it'll only be
revealed in its entirety just before the
toss tomorrow is that right
yeah he's given little clues about the
makeup of the team
about the fact that minus lavish shane
wouldn't be uh considered for
opening so the fact that matthew wade
and joe burns
uh it certainly seems from our point of
view that that will be what's happened
and cameron green he mentioned yesterday
will be considered for perhaps number
six
batting after travis head in the
australian batting order
um so yeah i mean cameron green
is a young all-rounder who has displayed
an amazing amount of talent with the bat
and ball
so justin langer has given every
indication that he will play
um the ball is the same as we've come to
expect
start cummins hazelwood line tim payne
captain wicketkeeper at number seven
and we have a fair idea of what that
australian top six will look like
as well based on what i've just said uh
previously so
justin langer yeah we'll know finally
tomorrow at the toss
um but uh it seems like that's what will
be the case okay let's talk about india
captain virat kohli will only play in
this test
because he goes back to india after for
the birth of his
first child so how critical is it that
india wins this first test
so critical miracle is such an important
player
everyone who follows cricket understands
that india certainly understands that
ajinkya rahane
their vice captain will take over from
the boxing day test onward
so really it's all about the narrative
around india is what happens
from here on after this adelaide test
match but virat kohli will be there
we expect that they will name an opening
pair of
uh agaval and
also they will have well a couple of
options really pretty sure will be
the opener i think they choose um but
they will assess
the form lines of those most recent tour
games
it looks like the wiki keeper will be
ridden sahar
not rishabh pant who was so impressive
two summers ago
last time against australia he was their
second leading run scorer behind
chateshwa pajara
so the fact that virat khali will be
there for this test that's unbelievable
he is
a great player but it seems as though
well we know
for certain he won't be there beyond
this test match
if they can draw first blood in this
series that would go a long way
to a historic series win and backing up
their win of two summers ago
in australia so can't wait to see what
they do i think um will be their third
same bowler
behind jasper boomerang and muhammad
shami
they rested him for that most recent
tour game um but yeah
for india it becomes about what happens
after this adelaide test match without
virat kohli
so what about the crowd how many people
will be there in adelaide
i believe at this stage the crowd number
is at 50 percent
um so that's what we're expecting by way
of crowd the adelaide test match is
always considered one of the
uh most fun test matches to go to they
have a festival atmosphere as
always but of course with the covert
outbreak a few
weeks ago there is some caution in place
there but i think it's a a nice place to
start the series i think the wicket
has a tinge of green in it and of course
the pink ball presents a unique
challenge
for each team as well even with the tour
game happening last week at the scg
so can't wait to see how this test match
of this test series
gets underway karena yeah brett sprigg
we look forward to your call on abc
grandstand thanks so much for joining us
the hobart hurricanes have suffered
their first loss of the big bash league
going down by five wickets to the
adelaide strikers in launceston last
night
peter siddall took five wickets on his
way to the fourth best figures ever
recorded in the bbl
his five for 16 included the wicked of
darcy short and helped to restrict the
home side to just 146.
hobart started strongly with the ball
with two early wickets to james faulkner
giving his side hope
[Applause]
but half centuries to alex kerry and
jake
wetherill ensured a comprehensive
striker's victory the hurricane's next
matches against the melbourne renegades
at bell reeve on saturday
in the nrl the canterbury bulldogs have
pulled off a recruiting coup
after signing melbourne storm winger
josh adoka on a four-year deal add-o car
will join the bulldogs at the end of the
2021 season after seeing out his
contract with the storm
the two-time premiership and new south
wales origin player has previously
expressed a wish to return to sydney for
family reasons
time for the weather now with graham
creed tropical cyclone yaza is still a
category 5
system and is going to continue to move
through
fiji as we move into thursday evening
and friday
this is a significant system we can see
how that eye is still visible even
though that
visual satellite image starts to
dissipate now we category five as it
passes between the north and south
island the entire country is expected to
be impacted by this system with flooding
rain
destructive winds and also a storm surge
so we are looking at extremely dangerous
conditions
over the next 48 to 72 hours in fiji
we've also had severe conditions across
australia today widespread severe
thunderstorm warnings for the northern
territory
new south wales and also into parts of
victoria new south wales in particular
severe weather warnings about the
northeast and the southeast at times
through the day
up around the northeast areas around
lismore have recorded well over 200
millimeters of rain
so this is all on top of that recent
flooding across the region
slow-moving thunderstorms have also
triggered flash flooding through parts
of the ranges
and eastern slopes or the slopes through
the eastern half of the state so we are
still looking at the potential of
significant conditions
through parts of new south wales at the
moment that extends down
into parts of victoria and just recently
a severe thunderstorm
warning was also issued around the
southern border areas of
queensland so those storms still very
active through queensland
at the moment and they also extend up
into the northern territory where the
monsoon trough
is slowly developing we should see the
showers and thunderstorms in darwin
tending to rain by
friday or saturday at this stage we are
looking at the potential of further
heavy falls we can see how extensive
that warning has been through this
afternoon
across the top end of the territory for
most of the continent we are looking at
very similar conditions to what have
been experienced today
so possible heavy falls across the far
north showers and thunderstorms bringing
some heavy falls across the eastern
mainland
we've got rain for tasmania now this
stage that will start to ease off as
we're heading towards the evening and
some storms about the north west
and central areas i've also got a pool
of very hot air sitting over the inland
but underneath that dry conditions at
this stage
but very wet up the east coast and far
north
thanks very much graeme remember you can
keep up to date at news.abc.net.au and
on abc iview
i'm carina cavallo more on our top
stories coming up in a moment
including those two new coronavirus
cases
that have been detected in sydney's
northern beaches
and we'll cross to london as tier 3
restrictions are imposed there in the
lead up to christmas stay with us here
on abc news
[Applause]
[Music]
2020 is almost over and what a year
it's been costa lend a hand to a very
special gardener
if i hadn't have had the garden maybe i
wouldn't have lived or a hundred
get crafty this christmas kids will love
making them and it's a great activity
for family and friends
and look at these luscious lockdown
gardens it's just so
rewarding having the ability to watch
life and nature just grow around you
gardening australia friday on abc and
iview
anywhere anytime a summer of
entertainment awaits on
abc eye views
carried me to these places that i never
thought imaginable
[Applause]
together we can create a better future
so you're saying you're keep squeaky i
decided to stand up last night and i'll
continue to stand up
we're coming to you from the great
barrier reef which is life
it's in my dna
your summer time streaming is on abc eye
view
[Music]
all right so let's all please bring our
again
we're actually looking at the site of
one of the greatest crimes of humanity
depending on what character i'm doing it
makes me more brave
i've always enjoyed people who have
beliefs that they're certain about
real sincere belief is like rocket fuel
[Applause]
[Music]
yeah this
it's more than just comedy abc tv plus
starts january 1. when you strip away
the commercialism the cultural
non-inclusiveness of christmas
what are we left with the peter dutton
action figure no
rolling with a lump of cold no is crap
okay for christmas special well it works
for cara's my candlelight
no it's the all-inclusive
non-denominational
pagan special satirising conservative
values against inclusivity it's a feast
of fun and this bloke's cooking all
washed out
under the shade of a cooler bar cask
shawn mcauliffe's mad as hell pagan
holiday special
sunday 8 30 abc and eye view
9 8 this new year's eve the parties at
yours
stay home with the abc for the biggest
night of the year
[Music]
at 8 30 join rove for
and at nine charlie pickering and zan
rowe bring you australia's biggest stars
there's only one place to be this new
year's eve that's your place with the
abc
from 8 30 on abc and iview
[Music]
new south wales on high alert three new
cases of covert 19
a sydney airport driver and two others
on the city's northern beaches
[Music]
the australian government takes its bali
dispute with china to the world trade
organization
ultimately it is the right avenue for
australia to take
at this point in time
emergency crews battle a major factory
fire in brisbane's east
[Music]
and the portrait of a former minus
island refugee
takes out one of the nation's top art
honors
hello welcome to abc news i'm carina
cavallo after almost two weeks
free of coronavirus cases new south
wales is once again
on high alert three new locally acquired
infections have been discovered
two on sydney's northern beaches and a
third
linked to international flight crew
another case an unfortunate eventuality
we may be an island but we are not
totally isolated from the pandemic that
is raging across the world
a world the country is exposed to
particularly through returned
australians
and flight crew thousands of airline
staff arrive in the state each week
the new case is a 45 year old van driver
for sydney ground transport he took
those workers to
and from the airport and hotels we have
a
plausible hypothesis that this
transmission may have
eventuated from contact to international
flight crew
there's a feeling of deja vu from a
fortnight ago
the last locally acquired case was
linked to a united states strain of
coronavirus
it was likely caught through contact
with international
airline staff at a quarantine hotel that
case broke
an almost month free streak of local
infections
the health minister says he was already
reviewing quarantine arrangements for
flight crew
now that it looks like a second case has
been linked to them
he says it could be time to make airline
staff go
into short-term quarantine rather than
continue the current policy
of self-isolation in hotels to make sure
that they do it in a safe way a way that
keeps our new south wales community
safe and preferably away from the
possibility of this virus
health authorities say the man developed
symptoms on saturday
he was tested yesterday after working
several shifts
and returned a positive result this
morning new south wales health has been
told the man
wore a mask at work i don't want the
general community to think that they
could have been exposed
three of his household contacts have
tested negative but
are still self-isolating genomic
sequencing is underway to confirm the
overseas origin of the case
the best christmas gift you can give to
your family
your friends and your community is to go
and get tested
if you have any symptoms of a virus and
do it straight away
cautious steps to avoid a resurgence tim
swanston
abc news sydney and we will have
more on this story in a moment with our
reporter in sydney
australia is fighting back against
china's trade sanctions the morrison
government has referred beijing's
decision to impose hefty tariffs on
australian bali
to the world trade organisation it's the
first time australia has taken china to
the independent
umpire he is rural reporter kath
sullivan
when these barley crops were planted
growers expected to feed the lucrative
chinese beverage market
beijing's decision to impose hefty
tariffs
no small beer for australian farmers
two and a half billion dollars in trade
lost
over the next five years that's straight
out of growers pockets so effectively
out of rural communities
out of our schools our footy clubs our
churches china claims australian farmers
were subsidised
and dumped below cost grain on its
market
australia says that's not true and
tonight it's finally calling in the
umpire
referring the matter to the world trade
organisation
this is the logical and appropriate next
step it's always
important for australia to stand up for
our values
but some exporters fear the move will
only lead to
further trade retaliation there's no
doubt this makes a lot of growers
nervous
you know we rely on china for a lot of
our export opportunities in agriculture
it's not as if anyone expects the wto
process will settle the bali barney
quickly
it could take years so what's the point
the chinese government has avoided
taking a phone call from canberra but
will be forced to take a phone call from
the dispute assessment mechanism in
geneva
it's important that we keep just playing
by the rules
and taking the next step in the process
and with
other australian exports including coal
cotton wine and beef
caught up in the trade spot with china
the wto move
might not be the last it is possible
that there could be further actions
china insists it's not to blame
we hope that the australian side will
reflect on itself
be consistent with its words and actions
rather than the other way around this
argument is not
just about bali as the relationship
between canberra and beijing worsens
the world is watching on especially
those that trade with china
will the global superpower respect the
rules that have allowed it to prosper
and the rules that it's long expected
others to abide by
kath sullivan abc news canberra
a billion dollar boost to aged care will
form the centerpiece of tomorrow's
budget update
supporting thousands more australians to
stay in their homes for longer
the morrison government has been under
pressure to the failings in the sector
exposed during the covert 19 crisis it
comes amid confirmation the elderly will
be first in line to receive a vaccine in
the new year
political reporter jane norman explains
against the odds and in the tightest of
time frames
scientists might have pulled off
something of a miracle
we have the likelihood there will be
three vaccines
ready for roll out next year australia's
on track to start administering the
first
jobs in march those over the age of 70
will be first in line
along with health care staff and
essential workers like
international air crews
yes there will be a cue a public health
campaign will be rolled out to encourage
all australians to get the job not once
but twice it's absolutely crucial that
once people start on this journey they
complete it we still need to know
how these vaccines will go in aging
people
and whether they prevent spread and how
long they last
this pandemic has exposed and magnified
vulnerabilities in our community
particularly in aged care it turns out
some older australians would have been
safer in their own homes
rather than in nursing homes where the
virus ran rampant
supporting people to stay at home longer
even in old age
has been a goal before covert and
tomorrow's budget update
continues that ambition another billion
dollars to provide an extra
10 000 home care packages
these additional packages will continue
to reduce
that waiting list billions have been
spent in recent years but it's barely
cleared the backlog
in march last year 129 000 older
australians were waiting for a home care
package
18 months later it's fallen to just
below
one hundred thousand thirty thousand
australians
have died who've been approved for home
care
packages many more are being pushed into
residential aged care prematurely
because the waiting times are too high
currently it's still over 12 months
that's unacceptable there's a promise of
more packages to come
we need to be able to grow at a rate
that the industry
and the sector can cope with a hint that
this is a mere down payment on the
response to the recommendations of
a scathing royal commission jane norman
abc news canberra
emergency crews are battling a major
blaze at a recycling facility
in brisbane's east it broke out earlier
this afternoon at hement
sending smoke and ash across the city
most of the roof has collapsed with fire
crews using cranes to try to fight the
flames
fire service acting superintendent tim
clark says everyone has been accounted
for
the building is a approximately
90 metres by 50 meters in size single
level
it is fully involved in fire
the fuel load inside is um quite
uh compacted waste cardboard
recycling material so it's uh extremely
heavy fuel load and it's too dangerous
to make entry into the building
the building only had uh four occupants
i believe
when um the triple o call was made they
evacuated so all of the occupants from
the
affected building have been accounted
for and are safe
the properties downwind
from the building have also been
evacuated by queensland police
more now on our top story two people
from sydney's northern beaches have
tested positive to cover 19.
reporter tim swanson joins us now tim
what do we know about the two new
infections
even in karina well one is a woman in
her 60s the other is a man in his 70s
they're both close contacts of each
other and they both live in the northern
beaches
region so while the source of the
infections is currently
under investigation no known link to any
previously identified case has been
found
so far new south wales health have put
out a public health alert
this afternoon uh relating to a number
of locations
on the northern beaches over the weekend
where people attended those locations at
particular time
that they are now close contacts those
locations are on sunday the palm beach
female change rooms
the coast palm beach cafe in palm beach
and the avalon bowling club on avalon
beach
on monday as well the sneaky grind cafe
on avalon beach so
it's pretty fresh breaking news of
course just this evening given that new
south wales health were really only
notified
late this afternoon what that means is
that genomic sequencing
is of course underway as well as contact
tracing to try
and identify any other contacts that
genomic sequencing will hopefully come
back in the next 24 to 48 hours
to try and shed some light on exactly
how these two new cases with really no
known link at this stage
have come about okay tim swanston
reporting there
a home covert 19 test kit has been
developed in brisbane
and approved for emergency use in the
united states
the australian test is world first and
results register on a person's mobile
phone
in under 20 minutes this covert 19 test
kit will allow people to take their own
swabs and receive a result
via an app on their mobile phone the
advantage that we bring is uh
a 96 accurate result uh within 20
minutes
at a at a price point which is
affordable and for a consumer to do that
test themselves
the test was invented in brisbane by dr
sean parsons a former emergency and
intensive care clinician
and his team at alum last night it was
approved for sale by the united states
food and drug
administration and the first kits will
be delivered
next month it's new technology that we
created
here in brisbane over a long time and
it's terrific to see this product
being approved by the fda in these
tumultuous times to help respond to
chronovirus
data from the kits will be sent to
relevant american health authorities to
help them keep track of case numbers
they'll retail at pharmacies in the u.s
for thirty dollars
although australian made the product
won't be available to us
anytime soon as current tga legislation
does not allow covert 19 tests to be
conducted
at home here in australia we don't have
that emergency that they have in the u.s
the other thing that's different here in
australia is we have a
very large and deliberately
expanded laboratory network using the
gold standard
of pcr testing we have plenty of
capacity there
by the end of january this production
facility will be making 100
000 of these test kits a day it's hoped
by march they'll be churning out 200
000 daily and they'll all be on their
way to the us
the company hopes to expand to europe in
the new year
unless there are changes to federal
legislation the australian-made test
kits could be available
anywhere but australia jessica rendall
abc news brisbane a canberra lawyer and
an accountant have been arrested after a
series of police raids around the act
it's alleged the two men had been
discussing setting up a money laundering
operation
no charges have yet been laid and police
say their investigation is ongoing
reporter elizabeth byrne is following
the story and joins me now elizabeth
what can you tell us about these raids
and arrests
well the latest is that a third person
has been arrested
a 35 year old woman who is associated
uh with the law firm that's been caught
up in this
there were raids across the region
really today in queanbeyan at a
grocery shop a place in farah which is
in
in canberra and in inner canberra uh
an accountancy firm at kingston uh
all were raided by the police as well as
the law firm today
police held a press conference to
explain what was going on
the